---
title: "Isaac Lab Tutorial #1"
date: 2026-01-07 16:40:00 +0900
categories: [Isaac]

published: false
---

&nbsp;

> * 비어 있는 Scene을 생성한다.
> * Isaac Lab의 작동 원리와 시뮬레이션 설정 및 제어 방법에 대한 기초를 다룬다.
<br>


IsaacLab > scripts > tutorials > 00_sim > create_empty.py

<br>

So before we actually dive right into the code I want to just quickly show how to execute the code and launch Isaac Sim which Isaac Lab is built on.

So before we actually do this we need to ensure that we are connected to the conda environment Isaac Lab which will be created during the installation. So a very easy way is to just click the run Python file.

This will now open Isaac Sim from the terminal and will create us an empty stage. As you could also see the simulation is running automatically. In order to stop the simulation we will go into the VS code. Go into the terminal and press Ctrl + C.

Another way is to use the Isaac Lab batch script or shell script depending on if you use Windows or Linux. I'm using Windows and you can't forget to use the command -p or what you could also just simply do is to just type in Python as you're already connected to the conda environment and then press Enter.

Now I'm going to explain the code step by step. Since we're working with a standalone script we need to setup the simulation app to launch Isaac Lab.

[import argparse]
First we import modules argparse which is a standard Python module for parsing argument.

[from omni.isaac.lab.app import AppLauncher]
And then app launcher which is a utility class from the Isaac Lab library that acts as a wrapper around the simulation app which you may already know from running scripts in Isaac Sim. The AppLauncher helps us to simplify the process of luanching the simulation app and also handles configurations using the command line arguments or environment variables.

[코드 23]
So before starting this stage we first create the argparser which will for now have a description.

[코드 25]
Next up we will expand the parser by adding predefined command line arguments like the headless mode, the live stream mode, or rendering options.

[코드 27]
In case we use command line arguments we will then parse these.

[코드 29]
And initialize the app launcher with them.

[코드 30]
Now finally we can launch the simulation app with the configuration of the app launcher.

[python ~ create_empty.py --help ]
Now for example we can run the script with the flag --help in order to see all the options and the description Tutorial on creating an empty stage. (터미널 확인) options: and the arguemnts: which some of those I already mentioned.

[python ~ create_empty.py --headless]
We can also use the arguments for example headless which will run the simulation in headless mode meaning it will not open Isaac Sim.
<br>

[from omni.isaac.lab.sim import SimulationCfg, SimulationContext]
Now that we have started to launch the simulation app with the configuration we can import all necessary modules. But it's important to note that the simulation must run before importing these. Otherwise you will run into some errors. We will import the module omni.isaac.lab.sim which is a sub-package and gives use the ability to spawn different objects and materials. define and modify USD-PRIMS and converts files such as URDF, OBJ, STL, FBX to USD and lastly the utility classes which we use the SimulationContext which is controlling the simulation related events such as physics, stepping and rendering. And the simulationCfg. which configures the simulation physics.

[코드 41 sim_cfg=SimulationCfg(dt=0.01)]
Now we're coming to the main part. Here we will first set up the simulation configuration in which we can define the simulation physics with attributes such as gravity, device-to-use or simulation time-step as we use here with dt=0.01 seconds.

[코드 42 sim=~]
The simulation context gives the user the control over playing, pausing, and stepping the simulator and also to initialize the simulation with the configs.

[코드 45 sim.set_camera_view]
Now we'll create a camera, which has a position in the 3D space with 2.5 meters in every direction and also a target point to look at which is the center 0,0,0.

[코드 48, sim.reset()]
After setting up the simulation scene, the first thing we have to do is to call the simulation context reset moethod. It plays the timeline and initializes the physics handles, which must always be called first before stepping the simulator. It's important to note that the reset method is different from the simulation context play method which only plays the timeline and doesn't initialize the physics handles.


Okay so now we're coming to the last piece in which we create a loop by stepping the simulation while the simulation is running which is true since the reset method automatically starts the simulation. One little note is that the step method takes in the argument render which dictates whether the step includes updating the rendering related events or not. By default the flag os set to true.

Finally we run the main function and since it's a loop we will have to manually close the Isaac Sim window or use Ctrl-C in the terminal to stop the simulation.



<br>

```python
# Copyright (c) 2022-2026, The Isaac Lab Project Developers (https://github.com/isaac-sim/IsaacLab/blob/main/CONTRIBUTORS.md).
# All rights reserved.
#
# SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause

"""This script demonstrates how to create a simple stage in Isaac Sim.

.. code-block:: bash

    # Usage
    ./isaaclab.sh -p scripts/tutorials/00_sim/create_empty.py

"""

"""Launch Isaac Sim Simulator first."""


import argparse

from isaaclab.app import AppLauncher

# create argparser
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description="Tutorial on creating an empty stage.")
# append AppLauncher cli args
AppLauncher.add_app_launcher_args(parser)
# parse the arguments
args_cli = parser.parse_args()
# launch omniverse app
app_launcher = AppLauncher(args_cli)
simulation_app = app_launcher.app

"""Rest everything follows."""

from isaaclab.sim import SimulationCfg, SimulationContext


def main():
    """Main function."""

    # Initialize the simulation context
    sim_cfg = SimulationCfg(dt=0.01)
    sim = SimulationContext(sim_cfg)
    # Set main camera
    sim.set_camera_view([2.5, 2.5, 2.5], [0.0, 0.0, 0.0])

    # Play the simulator
    sim.reset()
    # Now we are ready!
    print("[INFO]: Setup complete...")

    # Simulate physics
    while simulation_app.is_running():
        # perform step
        sim.step()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    # run the main function
    main()
    # close sim app
    simulation_app.close()
```

<br>

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    # run the main function
    main()
    # close sim app
    simulation_app.close()
```

* (line 59) `main()`
    * `main()` 함수를 실행한다.
    * `main()` 함수는 루프문으로 이루어졌기 때문에 수동으로 Isaac Sim 창을 닫거나 터미널에서 Ctrl + C를 사용해 시뮬레이션을 종료해야 한다.

<br>

[코드 62 simulation_app.close()]
We also have the close method which can also close the simulation and should be included to properly close the simulation app.

* (line 61) `simulation_app.close()`  
    `close()` which can also close the simulation
    * Should be included to properly close the simulation app


<br>

## References

[1] 강의
<br>
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sL1wCfp9tRU&list=PLQQ577DOyRN_hY6OAoxBh8K5mKsgyJi-r>

[2] Isaac Lab 공식 리포지토리
<br>
<https://github.com/isaac-sim/IsaacLab>

[3] Isaac Lab 공식 문서
<br>
<https://isaac-sim.github.io/IsaacLab/main/source/tutorials/00_sim/create_empty.html>